.\" Copyright (c) 2025 Joshua R. Elsasser.
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd October 23, 2025
.Dt COLOR-SCHEME-WATCHER.INI 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm color-scheme-watcher.ini
.Nd configuration file for the
.Xr color-scheme-watcher 1
program
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file provides configuration for the
.Xr color-scheme-watcher 1
program.
.Pp
The file is in the INI format and consists of lines which are either
empty, begin with a # or ; character to indicate a comment, contain a
section header enclosed in [ ] characters, or contain a key/value pair
separated by either a = or : character.
A section header must come before any key/value pair.
Configuration keys are case-sensitive.
Within a configuration value, other values may be substituted using
the ${section:key} syntax.
If the section name and : are omitted then it will either refer to a
key in the same section, or to special section-specific configuration
keys.
.Pp
The
.Cm general
section contains general configuration options.
The
.Ev HOME
environment variable is available for variable substitution.
The
following configuration keys are recognized:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm tty-info-directory
Defines the path to a directory containing tty info files.
Each file should contain two lines:
.Ql win=$WINDOWID
and
.Ql tty=$(tty) .
Filenames beginning with a dot are ignored.
The
.Xr color-scheme-watcher 1
program will remove invalid or stale files whenever it sets the
terminal emulator colors, as long as their name does not begin with a
dot.
.El
.Pp
The
.Cm light
and
.Cm dark
sections contains color definitions for light and dark mode.
The following configuration keys are recognized:
.sp
.Bl -tag -width highlight-foreground -compact
.It Cm foreground
text foreground color
.It Cm background
text background color
.It Cm cursor
background color of the text cursor
.It Cm mouse-foreground
mouse pointer body color
.It Cm mouse-background
mouse pointer outline color
.It Cm highlight-foreground
highlighted text foreground color
.It Cm highlight-background
highlighted text background color
.It Cm color0
normal black (pure black)
.It Cm color1
normal red
.It Cm color2
normal green
.It Cm color3
normal yellow
.It Cm color4
normal blue
.It Cm color5
normal magenta
.It Cm color6
normal cyan
.It Cm color7
white (light grey)
.It Cm color8
bright black (dark grey)
.It Cm color9
bright red
.It Cm color10
bright green
.It Cm color11
bright yellow
.It Cm color12
bright blue
.It Cm color13
bright magenta
.It Cm color14
bright cyan
.It Cm color15
bright white (pure white)
.El
.Pp
The
.Cm x-resources
section contains arbitrary X resources which will be set in the X
resource database whenever a color scheme is applied.
All of the configuration keys from either the
.Cm light
or
.Cm dark
section are available for variable substitution if the section name is
omitted.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width HOME
.It Ev HOME
substituted if used in configuration values, especially useful for
.Cm tty-info-directory
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/color-scheme-watcher.ini
default configuration file location if the
.Fl c
or
.Fl \-conf
options are not used.
If the
.Ev XDG_CONFIG_HOME
environment variable is not set then the file should be located in the
.Pa $HOME/.config/
directory.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
This is a basic configuration file which alternates between a
black-on-white and white-on-black color scheme:
.Bd -literal -offset Ds
[general]
tty-info-directory =        ${HOME}/.saved-xterm-ttys

[light]
foreground =                #000000
background =                #ffffff
cursor =                    #000000
mouse-foreground =          #000000
mouse-background =          #ffffff
highlight-foreground =      #ffffff
highlight-background =      #000000

[dark]
foreground =                #ffffff
background =                #000000
cursor =                    #ffffff
mouse-foreground =          #ffffff
mouse-background =          #000000
highlight-foreground =      #000000
highlight-background =      #ffffff

[x-resources]
XTerm*dynamicColors =       true
XTerm*highlightColorMode =  true
*background =               ${background}
*foreground =               ${foreground}
*cursorColor =              ${cursor}
*pointerColorBackground =   ${mouse-background}
*pointerColorForeground =   ${mouse-foreground}
*highlightColor =           ${highlight-background}
*highlightTextColor =       ${highlight-foreground}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr color-scheme-watcher 1 ,
.Xr xterm 1 ,
.Xr rxvt 7 ,
.Xr urxvt 7
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Xr color-scheme-watcher 1
program was written by
.An Joshua Elsasser Aq Mt joshua@elsasser.org .
